SURMA: Well, I went on vacation.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Oh, well done.
SURMA: And tried to do the
whole work-life balance thing.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: OK.
SURMA: And just,
you know, I put my--
so I took my iPad with
me and my work phone.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: That's a good
start to work-life balance.
I went on holiday
with my work phone.
SURMA: I only have one phone,
and it's my work phone.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: OK.
SURMA: So to enforce the
work-life balance thing,
the phone lived in the safe.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: In the safe.
And that's, of course,
a Faraday cage.
SURMA: No, but it keeps--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: You should
put it in the microwave, mate.
SURMA: It keeps me out.
That's the point.
I could have put it
in the fridge, maybe.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I feel I've not been very
good at the work-life balance
in my past vacations.
I had my phone.
It has all my private accounts
but also my work accounts
on it, so work chat is on there.
Work email is on there as well.
And so you have this whole--
you're browsing things, might
as well check into work email.
And then you read something.
You think, oh, I should react,
even though you're on vacation.
It just-- it keeps you--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yes.
SURMA: --engaged in a way
that it really shouldn't.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: I find that even
if I'm not deliberately going
to my phone to check
work stuff, I'll--
SURMA: You end up doing it.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Well, I'll be
out and about, and I'll go,
oh, I don't know how
to get to a place.
So I'll use Maps.
And so I pull out my phone.
And while I'm there
I see a tweet.
And I see the
start of it saying,
"This article is stupid, and."
And I'm like-- and
even if I try to not--
SURMA: Must read.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yes, because
if I don't respond then, then
in my mind it's just
going to be like, well,
what article are
they talking about?
What have I got wrong?
Is it genuinely wrong,
or are they wrong?
And, you know, that whole XKCD--
SURMA: That's the thing.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: --someone
is wrong on the internet.
And it might be me.
It might be them.
But I need to find out who.
SURMA: Someone is
wrong on the internet.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
SURMA: I feel like
for some reason
you feel you have
this obligation
to respond to people quickly.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
SURMA: If it's a person
you don't know on Twitter,
they are, like, insulting
you for the stupid article
you wrote, there is
no obligation for you
to respond within 10 minutes
of him authoring that tweet.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yes.
SURMA: You can do it
two or three days later.
So I think this topic is just
interesting, because every now
and then I see
tweets about people
who are having the time
to work on software,
web development, whatever,
in your spare time
is a matter of privilege.
And then I see other people
tweeting, oh, it's the weekend.
What should I do?
Vote on this Twitter poll
if I should learn React,
or if I should learn--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
SURMA: And I'm like, this
is probably not healthy.
I know for myself that sometimes
if I have a massive project--
my hobby is also my job
or has become my job.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Right, so if
you do your hobby at weekend,
you are doing your job.
SURMA: In a way, yes.
But also the other way around.
If I'm working, I'm
kind of doing my hobby.
And I feel that this
absolutely should not
be an expectation for anyone.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: No, no,
and I don't think it is.
But it's become culturally
normal within developers.
SURMA: I think in
the startup scene,
I feel like you are
expected to have--
or some companies look
at-- you get a profile.
If you have not a consistently
green contribution bar, meaning
you have committed something
on every day of the week,
you will have less
chance of being hired
than somebody who does do that.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Whenever I
interview somewhere, which
has been a while, but you
know that bit where they say,
do you have any
questions for me?
You know, every interview
someone asks that.
The question I ask them is,
your employees, your developers,
they're working late or a
weekend because of a deadline.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Do you see that
as just something that happens?
Or is it a failure in planning?
Because it has to really
be one of those two things.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: The
answer I'm not looking
for is, it's just what we do.
SURMA: Yeah, that
shouldn't be the answer.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Right.
SURMA: I think it can be--
that's something that happens.
Because it is incredibly
hard to do planning.
But then there must be the
second thing that says,
you will get that time back.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Right,
OK, that's fair.
Saying it just happens and
it's expected to deal with it,
that's the wrong answer.
The correct answer is, yeah, it
was a failure in the planning.
It couldn't have been predicted.
But here's how we deal with it.
As you say, you
get the time back
is really the ideal answer.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: The other wrong
answer, or probably the worst
answer, is that doesn't happen.
Because that means that manager
is unaware of it happening.
SURMA: Or lying,
and both are not
good qualities in a manager.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Exactly.
Exactly.
SURMA: So yeah, and I felt
like something I wanted,
because I was on vacation
browsing Twitter,
and I saw these tweets.
It's the weekend.
What should I do?
And I was like, my
first reaction was, oh,
I'm just playing literally
stupid games on my iPad.
Maybe I should be working
on a side project.
Use the time to
expand my horizon.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Right.
SURMA: And I had to convince
myself that it is OK to--
what might be perceived
as wasting time.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
SURMA: But I have noticed
that following your gut
and just allowing
you to be lazy,
if that's how you feel
like, it is so refreshing.
It is such an energy boost.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: But
we are definitely
saying this from a point
of view of a company which
does do it right.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: A lot of
people are working weekends
because their job depends on it.
I mean--
SURMA: Yeah, absolutely.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: --and working
longer hours does not scale.
SURMA: No, that will bite you
if you do it for too long.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So what's
your answer, then, Surma?
Like, if someone's working--
SURMA: That's a nice way
of putting me on the spot.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Are
you saying, oh, they're
got to change job, right?
SURMA: I've seen this argument
before, and it makes me angry.
That people are like, oh, if
you have to support IE 11,
I would switch jobs.
And I was like, not
everybody has the opportunity
to change a job.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
Right, absolutely.
SURMA: I know that in our
line of work, specifically
web developers, there's
a massive demand.
So you usually can say, I'm
just going to leave company A,
and I'll be pretty confident
to find another job somewhere
else.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
SURMA: Usually in
web development
that will work because
the demand is so big.
But if you are not
necessarily in that spot--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
SURMA: --it can
get a lot harder.
Or if you don't have
enough experience
to get all these jobs going that
want eight years of experience
with React, even though
it's only been out for five.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah,
I know a lot of people
doing development work up north,
because that's where I'm from--
North of England.
SURMA: Are you?
I didn't know.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
The accent's still
there, unfortunately.
There's not as many jobs
as there are in London.
So that sort of
attitude of, like, oh,
just change a job if
you don't like it,
yeah, it comes across as
incredibly privileged, snobby.
Yeah.
SURMA: I think, as always, it
requires a shift in paradigms
in the entire field of work.
And that's not easy to do.
But it's just something
that you as a person should
be aware of-- that what
you are doing right now
is not scalable,
and that you need
to take time for
yourself if you have
been working the last three
weekends or something.
Because, as I said,
it doesn't scale.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Well,
eventually you hit 24 hours,
and then you can't
work a 25th hour.
And at some point, you die.
[LAUGHTER]
SURMA: That went dark.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: It's not--
SURMA: And then the heat
death of the universe.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Well,
it's not sustainable.
So yeah, is that your
advice, just work less?
SURMA: Yeah, just work less.
No, I think it's
just like if you
need to fight for your right--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: To party.
[LAUGHTER]
SURMA: To not work if you
are not on work hours.
If you leave the
job, it must be OK.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: People who are
working more sensible hours
tend to get the same
amount of work done.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: It's
that same problem.
I had it last week.
I was working on
a piece of code,
and I was just hitting my head
against it for like two hours.
And I did the thing where I
eventually walked away and just
took half an hour to just--
I left the office.
I just walked around the
block a couple of times.
I came back to my desk, and
I solved it in five minutes.
SURMA: Ah, I love that.
I love this.
I mean, I hate it
because it's frustrating.
But I've experienced
so often where
it's like, just take a break.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
But taking a break while
there's a code problem there
is near impossible.
SURMA: You feel like you have
this entire thing-- construct,
build up, and it will
just vanish if you leave,
and you'll have to start over.
But that's usually
not what happens,
because the construct is
usually what is wrong.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Well,
the problem I have--
and I think I might have
spoken about it on the show--
can we call it a show?
Let's call it a show--
spoken about it
on the show before
is that if I leave
a code problem
and then go into a
social environment--
or it could just be having
dinner with my partner
or being out with
friends, there is still
80% of my brain trying
to solve the problem.
But now I don't even
have a code editor.
So I'm hitting my head
against the problem even worse
than I was at my desk.
So the break I took
was just on my own,
didn't have to socialize.
I was still sort of roughly
thinking about the problem
but also listening to a podcast.
SURMA: Yeah, fresh
oxygen and just getting
distracted every now and then.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: And came
back and went, oh, yeah.
That's the order.
Oh, it works.
SURMA: Yes, it was a semicolon.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yes.
So, yeah, overworked
people are bad coders.
But I don't know the answer
if you're in a situation where
you can't avoid it.
SURMA: No, I'm not
saying I have the answer.
It's just something I
thought about on vacation.
I was like, I'm trying to get
better with this because I
have a job where I can.
But it should be a high
priority for more people.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: In
the last episode,
we spoke a lot about
needing views and stuff.
And I think there was a
subtext there that it was
employee review time for us.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
And it's done now.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So I
don't actually care.
SURMA: No.
Just unsubscribe.
We don't care.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
We don't need you.
SURMA: Please stay.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah,
please don't go.
SURMA: Please.